Good morning.
Welcome to session 126,
Implementing Core Data with
Hands-on Examples.
I'm Rick Ballard.
This is Chris Hanson,
and we're engineers with
Development Technologies.
Today we're going to be going through
several steps in showing you how to
build an effective core data application.
We're going to start out
in the Xcode Data Modeler,
showing you how to build
your core data model.
Then we're going to move on to a
command line example that shows you
how to set up your persistence stack.
Next, we'll show you how to build an
application using AppKit that
has a simple table view populated
with data from core data,
but without using bindings yet.
And then we'll move on to another
example showing you how to use the
power of core data with Cocoa bindings.
Finally, we'll show you a completed app.
We're going to be building a recipe
manager today with core data.
So this is the core recipes application.
And what we'll be building in the
hands-on examples is a simplified
version of the recipe manager,
designed to show you
examples about core data.
In the end, we'll take a brief look at
what a more complex core
recipe manager might look like.
So this is a hands-on session.
And if you're following along today,
there are a few things you'll need.
You'll need a laptop with a
copy of OS X Tiger installed,
either Xcode 2.0 or Xcode 2.1.
You'll need your WWDC CD,
which has a sample code disk image on it.
You want to look in there,
find one of the Core Data sessions,
pull up the Core Recipes disk image.
Inside that disk image is
a sample code disk image.
And you'll need that sample code if
you want to try and follow along.
Inside, you'll find a hands-on examples
folder with four examples on it.
And those are the examples
we'll be stepping through today.
Now,
if you're having trouble following along,
you're having trouble keeping up,
don't worry.
Inside the sample code,
there's a begin folder and an
end folder for each example.
The end folder is what we'll be building.
So it's better that you
follow along with us,
pay attention,
make sure you don't miss anything.
And you can always go back using
the read me in the disk image
and build from the begin to the
end example on your own time.
So we're going to start out,
for those of you who haven't read the
documentation or maybe missed yesterday's
session or just need a quick refresher,
with a quick overview of some
of the concepts of Core Data,
which Chris Hanson is going to give us.
CHRIS HANSON: Thanks, Rick.
So Core Data, as we often describe it,
is an object graph management
and persistence framework.
Here's the architecture of what we
call the Core Data Persistence Stack.
Starting sort of at the top level,
you have your data model.
This model describes the model objects
in model view controller terms in
your application in rich detail.
It describes the entities,
the types of things that you're
working with in your application,
as well as the attributes that they
have and how they relate to each other.
This model is then fed into a persistent
store coordinator that manages
any number of persistent stores.
These persistent stores are what
actually store the data that's
represented by your model and
that's used in your application.
The Persistent
Store Coordinator basically acts as
a facade on any number of stores,
presenting a unified interface to
the higher levels of the stack,
so they don't have to care so much
where data comes from or where it goes.
On top of the persistent
store coordinator,
you have one or more
managed object contexts.
These are sort of like
your drafting table.
They're where you keep your work
products while you're working
with different object graphs.
You might have one managed object
context in one application.
Another type of application
might have several,
all talking to the same
persistent store coordinator.
And finally,
you have your managed objects.
These represent the actual data in
your application and are connected
up into what we call an object graph.
The managed object context
and the managed objects are
really how you interact with
the data in your application.
If you're performing operations
on individual bits of data,
you're generally going to be
working with your managed objects.
If you're working with your
entire object graph as a whole,
for example, if you're saving it or if
you're fetching things into it,
you'll be working with the
managed object context.
So to start with,
Rick is going to show us how
to do some Core Data modeling
to describe your model objects.
Those of you following along will
want to open up in the example one,
working with a Core Data Model folder,
you'll see a file called
corerecipes-begin.xcdatamodel.
That's an Xcode data model file,
and that's what we'll be
working with in a moment.
When we go through the data modeler,
we'll show you how to work with
Xcode's data modeling tool,
how to add entities, attributes,
and relationships between entities.
And finally, we'll show you the Predicate
Builder and how to build a simple
predicate for a fetch request.
So let's go to our hands-on
part of this presentation.
And you can go ahead and
open up the Exi Data Model.
Going to turn up the zoom a little bit.
So here you can see we have two entities,
one named Recipes and
one named Ingredients.
Both of these have several attributes,
such as name and preparation time.
And in the upper part of the Data Model,
we have another list of the
entities and of the attributes
for the currently selected entity.
So we're going to start out by adding
an attribute to an existing entity.
So let's select the Recipe entity.
We're going to click on the plus
button up in the Property pane
and choose Add Attribute.
Now let's add a number
of servings attribute.
So we'll call it number of servings.
When you're adding attributes,
you want to start them
with a lowercase letter.
And then generally,
the convention is to use bumpy case.
So we say number of servings.
And we're going to set
this type to int16.
We can leave this as
an optional attribute,
so don't uncheck the optional checkbox.
And we will set the
minimum value to zero,
because you can't have
fewer than zero servings.
And we'll set a default value
of 4 so that when you create a
new instance of a recipe entity,
its number of servings will start with 4.
And you can see if you're familiar
with entity relationship diagrams,
this diagram should be fairly familiar.
You can see there's a relationship
already between recipes and ingredients.
And the arrowheads on the
relationship indicate that it's
a one-to-many relationship.
That is,
every recipe can have many ingredients,
denoted by the two arrowheads,
and every ingredient
can have but one recipe,
denoted by the single arrowhead.
So let's go ahead and add a new entity.
Let's say that a recipe
is written by one chef.
So we're going to add a chef entity.
So up in the Entities pane,
you're going to want to
click on the plus button.
And you may want to drag that
over to the left so it's not
obscuring the rest of your diagram.
And let's name this entity Chef.
I'm going to do that either in the
diagram or in the upper right-hand
corner where it says Name.
Let's add a couple
attributes to our new entity.
Well,
a chef has a first name and a last name,
so let's add first name
and last name attributes.
I'm going to go up to
the Properties pane,
click the plus button,
choose Add Attribute.
And we're going to name
this one First Name,
again with the same
capitalization convention,
lowercase first, uppercase N for name.
Let's do it again.
Add another attribute.
We'll call this one Last Name.
Now these things,
these two attributes have
some things in common.
They're both strings.
We don't have to edit
them all separately.
We can select them both
up in the properties pane.
And now we can drag down on
the type and choose string,
and it will set it for both
of them at the same time.
So now let's go and go
back to the first one,
just selecting one at a time.
And let's set the default value
of first name to first name.
Let's go to the second one and set
the default value to last name.
So now when we create a new
instance of a Chef entity,
it will come with a first name of first
name and a last name of last name.
So now let's make this relationship
between chefs and recipes that we need.
Well, every recipe is written
by one chef in our world,
and a chef can write multiple recipes.
So let's go ahead and
start with the chef entity.
Click on the chef entity.
We're going to add a
relationship to recipe.
Then we'll add a relationship
back from recipe to chef and make
them inverse of each other to
create a one-to-many relationship.
So start by clicking the plus button
and choosing Add Relationship.
We're going to name this
relationship Recipes because it's
the recipes that a chef wrote.
And we're going to set the destination of
this relationship to the recipe entity.
Finally, we will check the
Too Many Relationship checkbox.
And now every chef is
related to many recipes.
Well, let's put the inverse in.
So click on Recipe,
click the plus button in
the Property pane again,
and choose Add Relationship.
And we'll name this one Chef,
because it's the chef
that wrote the recipe.
So set the destination entity
after you've named it to Chef.
Now we have two relationships here,
but they're really the
inverse of each other.
So we want to set them to
be an inverse relationship.
This will allow Core Data to do its
relationship maintenance for us.
So you're going to choose the
inverse dropdown and set the
inverse of this relationship to the
recipe's relationship on the Chef.
And you see that the two arrows
we had going between them have now
become one arrow that signifies
a one-to-many relationship.
So let's do one more thing.
Yesterday,
in the introduction to Core Data Session,
they talked about fetch requests
as how you fetch the data
from the persistent stack.
Well, normally, when you create a fetch
request for an entity,
it will fetch all the entities available,
or all the instances of the given entity
available in the persistent stack.
But you may only want to fetch
a subset of those entities.
And so you may want to assign a
predicate to your fetch request,
which will resolve to true or false
for each instance of an entity.
And when it resolves to true,
it will fetch that instance.
If it resolves to false,
it will not fetch that instance.
You can do this all programmatically,
but we have a nice predicate builder
for graphically building your predicate
for a fetch request in the data model.
So let's go ahead and do that now.
We're going to add a fetch
request for the Chef entity.
So you want to click on Chef.
And again, in the Properties pane,
you're going to click on the plus button.
You can choose Show Fetch Requests
if you want from the dropdown first,
but you can add one either way.
You're going to click on the plus
button and add a new fetch request.
Let's name this fetch request
Chef Name Fetch Request,
because we're going to design a
predicate that will allow us to
fetch a chef or all the chefs whose
name matches a given name that we'll
supply when we use the fetch request.
So once we've named it,
click the Edit Predicate button
to bring up our Predicate Builder.
And what we're going to do here is make
it so that when you use this predicate,
you'll supply a value for
a variable called name.
And the predicate will match a given
chef if the first name is equal to
the value you supply or the last name
is equal to the value you supply.
So we want to OR two conditions together.
So let's click the plus button
to add a second condition.
And the default it comes up
with is to AND them together.
We're going to choose to
OR them together instead.
And we want to make one of the conditions
on first name and the other on last name.
So you're going to choose the second
box and change it to last name.
Let's change both of those equal
boxes to like because we don't
want to compare to see if the value
we supply is exactly the same.
We want to see if it matches
like a regular expression,
though reject is a little more
like a regular expression.
Like is more like shell-style
globbing matching.
And we're going to Control-click to the
right of that field and choose Variable.
This lets us enter in a name for
a variable that we're going to
see if the first name is like.
So let's say our variable's name, name.
We're going to do the same
thing for the second condition.
Control-click to the right of the field,
change it to a variable,
enter in the name of our variable,
which is name.
And we can hit OK now.
You see it's got a string
representation of that predicate.
That string representation is what
you would use if you were building
a predicate programmatically using
the predicate with format method.
So this is a predicate that allows
us to fetch any chef whose first
name or their last name is equal
or is like the value we supply.
If you play around with the
predicate builder a bit more,
you can see that you can
drag conditions around,
you can create fairly complex predicates,
move parts around.
It's a very nice tool.
Chris,
can I show you a little bit of that?
So if we added a new condition,
for example, or added an and,
you can move parts of it around.
This is something you can experiment
with when you get a chance.
There we go.
All right, so let's move on.
So go back to our slides.
So what did we just do?
Well, we opened the data model and added
an attribute to an existing entity.
We created a new entity
in our data model.
We added a one-to-many relationship
between two existing entities.
And we created a fetch request in our
model that we could access later in
our application and used the Predicate
Builder to assign it a predicate.
Now we're going to move on to
building a command line example
that sets up a persistent stack,
and Chris is going to
lead us through this.
So now that we have a data model,
we need to actually do something with it.
What we're going to do here is create
a simple command line application that
sets up a Core Data persistent stack,
fetches some managed objects
from a persistent store,
and then if it doesn't have any
managed objects in that store yet,
it'll create one,
insert it in a managed object context,
and save that context
to the persistent store.
So let's go hands-on.
And in your example two folder,
you have Core Recipes, CocoaView.
Actually, you have example two,
building a Core Data command
line application.
So open Core Recipes tool begin.
And let's look at corerecipes-tool.m.
So if we scroll down to
the main routine here,
we have a pretty giant font size here.
It's probably smaller on your screen.
We can see sort of the
structure of this tool.
What we've done is--
Set up a persistent stack in
initialized Core Data stack.
Then we try to fetch all the chefs
that are available through that stack
using the fetch all chefs routine.
If that succeeds,
we check how many we fetched.
If we didn't actually fetch any,
we try to insert and save a chef.
And finally, if we did fetch anything,
we try to print it out.
So let's just build and run this.
We get an error.
This error happens because we haven't
even initialized our stack yet.
We've only written the
skeleton of the code.
So let's go back to core-recipes-tool.m
and look at initialized Core Data stack.
What we have here is a commented
out block of code that actually
finds our model and then
sets up our persistent stack.
Let's just uncomment
this large comment block.
We can see here that the first
thing we do is try to find our
managed object model describing
our data from our bundle.
Since this is a command line tool,
it'll just look in the
same directory as the tool.
Then we set up a persistent store
coordinator to provide access
to our data using that model.
Finally,
we create a managed object context to
use when working with our data and attach
it to the persistent store coordinator.
And then we add an XML persistent store.
Now,
you can actually use one of three store
types that represent on-disk stores.
You can use XML,
you can use a binary format,
or you can use SQLite.
And we also have a fourth type of store,
an in-memory store,
that doesn't actually write
any data to disk on save,
but is very useful if you have
your own document formats.
We're not going to go
into how to use that here.
I encourage you to come to
Advanced Core Data Usages tomorrow,
where we might be talking about
a little bit more of that.
So now let's build and run,
saving as we go.
And this time,
we get an error while fetching.
So obviously, it's gone through.
It's set up our persistent stack.
It's tried to add that store.
But there's nothing in it.
So let's go back to corerecipes.tool.m
and find the fetchAllChefs method.
Not only was there nothing in the store,
we didn't even actually have the
code working that does the fetch.
So again, we have a commented out block
of code that you can uncomment.
And we can see that the first thing
it does is find the Chef entity.
Generally in Core Data,
you need to work with entities
directly rather than by name,
although there are places where
you'll work with them by name too.
So we can use the utility
method on NSEntityDescription,
EntityForName and ManagedObjectContext
to find our entity.
Once we have our entity,
we programmatically set up
a fetch request that will
just find all Chef entities.
The reason that it'll find them all
is that we don't specify a predicate.
If we don't specify a
predicate on a fetch request,
it's assumed that you want all instances
of the entity that you're fetching.
Once we have our fetch request,
we simply ask our managed object
context to find all of the instances
of that entity that it possibly can.
Once we have our fetch request,
we simply ask our managed object
context to find all of the instances
of that entity that it possibly can.
Once we have our fetch request,
we simply ask our managed object
context to find all of the instances
of that entity that it possibly can.
and we get just a little further.
Now you see that we get an error
while inserting and saving a chef.
Well, this happened because we
tried to fetch our chefs,
but we didn't actually have any.
So of course it tries to
create an initial one,
but because that code
isn't hooked up yet,
it doesn't actually get anywhere.
So let's go back to corerecipes.tool.m.
And in our next method,
we have insertChef and save.
Here we have one more little piece
of commented out code that shows you
how to create a new managed object.
So generally,
when you're creating new managed objects,
you use an entity description insert new
entity-- insert new object for entity
for name in managed object context.
You don't actually have to find the
entity description object for the
entity that you're referring to,
because you can simply specify
the name and the managed object
context you want to create it in.
The managed object context can find
that entity because it's attached
to a persistent store coordinator,
which in turn is attached to a model.
Once we've created our object,
we set a couple of
initial properties on it.
We're just using John Doe
for the chef's name.
And finally,
now that we have an object in
our managed object context,
we save it.
and finally, we return it.
So at this point,
we can build and run one more time.
And you see that no Chef was found,
so we created one and inserted it in
our managed object context and saved it.
And we just use NSLog to
output the Chef that we saved.
So you can see that not only does it have
the first name and last name that we set,
it also has an empty
collection of recipes,
and it has a managed object ID.
Excellent, we've got screen zoom.
So if we run this one more time,
You can see that we actually
found that chef now that it's
been saved in a persistent store.
And we can get the name
of the chef that we found.
So what have we learned?
Going back to slides.
Well, we figured out how to set up a
Core Data persistent stack that
provides access to our data.
We fetched some data from it,
some managed objects.
When we didn't find any managed objects,
we created one,
and then we saved our object
graph containing that one object.
Now that we know how to work with
Core Data from a command line tool,
let's kick it up a notch and
go to an AppKit application.
So those of you following along will
want to look in the example three
folder and open up the Core Recipes,
Cookerview-begin project.
This project, we're going to go through
how to display data from your
managed objects in a table view.
We'll show you how to traverse the
relationships in your object graph.
will show you how to create a
custom NSManageObject subclass,
which you can provide your own business
logic or custom model behavior in.
We'll show you how to
delete managed objects,
and we'll show you a little
bit about delete rules.
So let's go hands-on.
So we're going to open up the
Core Recipes Cook Review Project.
Let's start out in our nib file.
So go ahead and open up mainmenu.nib.
This machine is not
quite configured right,
so go ahead and launch Interface Builder.
[Transcript missing]
Here we have a blank window which
we're going to use for our application.
So we want to display
data in a table view.
Let's start out by dragging an
NS table view from the appropriate
palette into the window.
If you're not familiar
with Interface Builder,
you might not want to
try and follow along now.
If you are,
you should be able to keep up.
I'm going to resize that to be
most of the size of our window.
We're also going to drag in an
NS button and place it below the
table view down in the lower right.
Let's name that button Delete.
We'll use it to delete
our recipes in a bit.
Now you can see when you look in the
document window in this nib that we
have a Core Recipes Controller instance.
That's our main controller class we're
going to use for this application.
And it needs to know
where the table view is.
So let's start out by control
dragging from the Core Recipes
Controller up to our table view.
Now you can see it tells you the name of
the object you're currently pointing at.
You want to make sure it says
NS Table View so you don't
connect it to the scroll view,
for example.
So go ahead and control
drag up there and let go.
And it should bring up the recipe
table outlet on our controller.
That's an outlet we set up.
Let's go ahead and connect that.
Now our table view needs to have
a data source outlet pointing
back at the controller since
we're not using bindings yet.
So let's go from the table view,
drag down to the controller,
Hook up the data source outlet.
Now, if the data source isn't
one of the outlets showing,
you probably dragged from the
scroll view or a different view,
maybe a column view.
So try again, drag from the table view
down to your controller.
Hook up data source.
Finally,
let's Control-drag from the Delete button
to our controller and hook up the
Delete Recipe target on the controller.
Now let's set up our table
view to display our data.
You want to click down until
your inspector says that it's an
NSTableView you're inspecting.
And you want to go to the
attributes part of the inspector,
which is in the pop-up, the first option.
And it starts out with
two columns by default.
So let's add a third column.
Because we have three pieces of
information we need to display.
We need to display the recipe name,
the first name for the chef who
is associated with the recipe,
and the last name for the chef
who is associated with the recipe.
So let's go ahead.
We've got three columns.
Let's resize them so we can see all
three of them in the table view.
Let's click on that first column
header and name it "Recipe."
That's where we'll put the name
of the recipe we're looking at.
Let's click on the second one
and call it "Chef First Name."
From the third column,
we will call chef last name.
Now we need some way for the
table view to tell its data
source what goes in what column.
We're going to use the identifier
for a column to do that.
So select the first column again,
and in the attributes inspector,
there's an identifier field.
Just put in name.
We're going to use the
identifier field as a key path,
which we're going to call value
for key path on our recipe NSManage
object to get the name of the recipe.
For the second one,
we're going to put chef.firstname.
That's a key path,
which accesses chef and
then the first name of chef.
Well, now chef is the name of the
relationship we added to the
recipe entity in the first step.
So what that's going to do when
we call value for key path,
chef.firstname,
is traverse the relationship between
the recipe entity and the chef entity.
We're going to, in this application,
fetch all our recipes at the beginning,
but we're never going to use an NSFetch
request to get the name of the recipe.
To pull our chefs out of
the persistence stack.
We don't have to do that because we can
traverse the relationship between the
recipe and the chef to get at our chefs.
For our third column,
we're going to call it chef.lastname
to get at the last name.
And make sure, if you can't see up here,
we're doing lowercase l for last name,
uppercase n.
It's the same naming convention
we used when we were naming our
attributes in the data modeler.
That about wraps it up for our Nib.
So let's go ahead and
close the Nib document.
And it'll ask us to save.
We'll go ahead and save.
And go back to Xcode.
We're going to open up
Core Recipes Controller.
Let's open up the header file
and take a brief look at it.
I should note for this application,
we created a data file that's
pre-populated with recipes.
So we're not creating any
recipes in this example.
And the recipes for this
example are in a store file,
which is included in the project.
It's an XML store.
So in the header file,
you can see this is just
an NSObject to control it.
And we're going to
hang on to our context,
our managed object context,
and our managed object model.
We also have a mutable array of recipes.
Well, for this example,
we're going to fetch all our recipes,
cache them in an array in our object,
and use them to give
values to our table view.
So let's go ahead and go over
to the implementation file,
which is corerecipescontroller.m.
And from the function pop-up,
you should be able to get
down to the number of rows in
table view data source method.
This is one of the two
data source methods.
And since we're not implementing
all the functionality here,
if you're doing all the
data source functionality,
you'd have a lot more methods.
And you'll find when we jump to bindings
that it'll do a lot of this for us.
But for now,
we're going to do it with data source.
Go ahead and uncomment
this block of code.
And you'll see it checks
and sees if we've already
populated our recipes array.
If not, it'll go ahead and populate it,
make sure we have it.
And it'll get the count of the
number of recipes that we fetched.
So let's take a look at that populate
recipes method and see what that does.
Go to the function pop-up again.
And let's uncomment that
first block of code.
You'll see this is very
similar to what we did before.
We get our managed object context.
And if you look up in the file later,
you'll see that there's the standard
code to initialize the context
in the managed object model.
This is something you'll get when you
create a new Cocoa Core Data application
because it comes in the template.
We create a fetch request,
just like we did in the last example.
We set its entity to recipe.
Let's uncomment the second block of
code in which we execute the fetch,
get back an array of recipes,
and we cache it in our object controller.
So let's go to the last
data source method.
From the function pop-up,
you want table view object
value for table column row.
Let's go ahead and uncomment this.
Here again, we make sure that we
populate our recipes.
We get the column identifier for
the column we're supplying data for.
That's what we set up
in Interface Builder.
We make sure that it's within the
valid-- that the row we're getting
actually exists as a recipe.
And finally,
we simply get the recipe managed
object context back out of
our array with object index.
And we call value for keypath
passing that column identifier.
So value for keypath name
to get the recipe's name.
Value for keypath chef.firstName
to traverse that relationship and
get the first name of the chef.
Let's go ahead and build and run this.
We're going to save as we go.
For those of you on laptops,
don't worry if you can't
keep up quite that much,
but you'll see in our table view,
we've got four recipes.
This comes out of our store that
we created that's in the bundle.
And you've got a chef first
name and a chef last name.
So there, we've accessed data that
we didn't fetch out.
We just traversed the relationship to
get to that Chef data in our store.
So let's go ahead and quit this and
add the ability to delete a recipe.
So there, we've accessed data that
we didn't fetch out.
We just traversed the relationship to
get to that Chef data in our store.
Let's go ahead and uncomment this method.
All this does is it gets the
selected row in the table view,
gets the recipe that corresponds
to that table row back out of
our array of Cache recipes,
and it tells the managed object
context to delete the recipe.
When you want to delete
an NSManaged object,
you tell the context to delete it,
and that marks it for deletion.
At that point,
you shouldn't use that object anymore.
If you simply release the object, well,
it will go out of memory,
but it's still persistent.
It's still in your store,
assuming that you added it
to a managed object context.
So to actually delete
the NSManaged object,
you tell the context to delete it,
and then you save.
We don't actually save in
this application because we're
not changing the store file.
So let's go ahead and build and run,
saving as we go.
And select a recipe.
Let's try clam chowder.
And press the delete button.
You see it goes away.
Now here,
there was one chef that had two recipes.
We deleted one of them.
What Core Data did,
since we set the chef relationship
and the recipes relationship
as inverse of each other,
was automatically maintain
that relationship for us.
Previously, the chef had the recipes
relationship pointing to two recipes.
Well, we deleted one of them.
But instead of leaving
the chef's relationship
pointing to a deleted recipe,
Core Data went through that
relationship to the inverse and
told the chef to remove the recipe.
And the chef removed that
deleted recipe out of its set
of recipes it was related to.
That's automatic
relationship maintenance.
The reason it just
removed it from that set,
nullifying the relationship,
is because the delete rule
we had set was nullify.
So let's quit this and go to
our data model and see where
we set that delete rule.
Now if you click on the
Chef relationship in Recipe,
In the upper right,
you'll see it says Delete Rule,
and it's set to nullify.
So that means when you delete me,
nullify the relationship on the other
side of anything that's related to me,
so they're not pointing
at a garbage object.
Well, what if we wanted,
when we deleted a recipe,
for it to delete the
associated chef as well?
Let's change that delete rule to cascade.
And let's go ahead and build and run.
Now select Clam Chowder and
press the Delete button.
And you see that Lily Benthen,
the chef of Clam Chowder,
who is also the chef of
Pan-Seared Swordfish,
has been deleted and disappears
out of Pan-Seared Swordfish.
Well, when she was deleted,
why did she disappear
from Pan-Seared Swordfish?
Because her recipes relationship
also has a nullified delete rule.
And so the cascade delete rule on our
recipe deleted the associated Chef.
The nullify delete rule on
the Chef nullified it back
on the last remaining recipe
that was related to that Chef.
So let's go ahead and quit this.
We have those two columns,
firstName and lastName.
Well,
wouldn't it be better to display the
full name of the Chef in one column
instead of having two extraneous columns?
We don't have a full name
attribute on the Chef,
and if we added one,
that would be redundant information.
We wouldn't have to keep the full
name in sync with both the first
name and the last name attributes.
So instead,
we're going to create a new accessor
on that ManageObject that specifies
a derived attribute of full name.
So to start out, open that data model up.
We'll click on Chef.
We're currently using a base
NSManageObject for this chef.
We really want to use our own new class,
a Chef, which is going to inherit
from NSManageObject.
So when you select Chef,
you'll see that the class
is set to NSManageObject.
We're going to change that
to Chef with a capital C.
Let's save this data model and close it.
And let's go to the File menu,
say New File.
We're going to create a
new Objective-C class.
Under Cocoa,
you'll see the Objective-C class type.
Choose that and hit Next.
And we're going to name this Chef.m.
This is our Chef class.
Now you see, when it comes up,
it inherits from NSObject.
NSManageObject is the
root object of our models.
So we're going to change this to
NSManageObject to inherit from.
This is a custom NSManageObject subclass.
Right now, it doesn't provide any
new custom behavior,
so let's add that full name method.
So you're going to just use
standard obc method declaration
syntax to add NSString full name.
Let's go over to the implementation file,
chef.m.
had that same method declaration,
but we're going to put the
implementation here instead.
This is a very simple method.
We really just need to
concatenate the first name and
the last name and return that.
So we're going to return
We're going to use the
in a string class method,
string with format.
We provide a format string
that has two objects,
so %at%at for our format string,
Now for the first object,
we're going to want the first name.
So we send a message to self,
value for key, first name.
That's how we get the first
name out of the NSManage object.
and finally,
self-value-for-key-lastname to provide
the second half of that format string.
I'm going to close that method,
put a semi on it.
Let's build and run.
One more thing we have to do.
So let's quit this and
actually use that method.
We're not using it yet.
So close this file and
open up the nib file again.
So we have two columns,
and they're using chef.firstname,
chef.lastname.
Let's select the table view.
In the Attributes Inspector,
let's change columns back
to two instead of three.
And we may want to rearrange the columns
up there so it looks nice and neat.
And let's rename that Chef first
name column to just Chef.
Because we're going to put the full
name of the chef in that column.
For the identifier,
instead of saying Chef.FirstName,
we'll say Chef.FullName.
So now, when we call value for key,
it's going to traverse the
Chef relationship and then call
value for key full name on the Chef,
which will invoke that full name accessor
we added through key value coding,
get back the full name by concatenating
the first name and the last name,
and returning it.
So let's close this nib, saving as we go.
And let's build and run
and see if it works now.
There we go.
A recipe column and a Chef column.
Now note that's a derived attribute.
When you get into bindings,
you'll see you want to set
that as a dependent key,
that the full name is dependent on
the first name and the last name.
And if you go to the
binding sessions later,
you should see how to do that
or drop in the Core Data Labs.
Since this isn't a bindings application,
we didn't have to do that.
So let's go ahead and quit,
and let's switch back to our slides.
So what did we just do?
We populated an NS table view with
data we pulled out of our Manage
Objects using value for Keypath.
We demonstrated how to
traverse a relationship between
our recipes and our chefs.
And you don't have to fetch
everything out of the stack.
You really just need to fetch
something that you can use to
traverse relationships to get
at your other objects from.
We created a custom
NS Manage Objects subclass.
This was a fairly simple one.
You can create your own much more complex
ones with your own business logic,
customizing your model classes.
We demonstrated the nullify
and the delete cascade rules.
And there's one more thing,
a custom data formatter.
Let's jump back to hands-on
real quick and show that.
Can we see our hands on again, please?
So say you wanted to display
some information about an
NSManage object in the debugger.
Let's go ahead and put a break
point in the delete recipes method.
If you're following along,
I wouldn't try and follow
along for this part.
We're going to go pretty quickly,
type in some obscure syntax.
To learn about custom data
formatters on your own,
I would look in the Xcode user manual.
We're just going to give
you a quick demo of this.
So go ahead and put a break point on
self-managed object delete object.
Let's close this file
and build and debug.
So go ahead and delete
one of those recipes.
Here we're stopped in Xcode's debugger.
It uses GDB.
And you can see in the upper
right-hand pane where it
lists the visible variables,
we have recipe to delete,
which is our NSManage object.
But it doesn't display anything
very useful about that.
Say we wanted to display some
useful information in the summary
column about our NSManage object.
We're going to use a custom
data formatter to do this.
So double click in the summary column.
This syntax is a little obscure.
You can look it up in
the Xcode user manual.
What we're going to say is curly brace,
then paren ns_string*paren
to return an NSString.
Square bracket, square bracket,
$var in uppercase is essentially
self in a custom data formatter.
So we're going to send this variable,
message entity, to get its entity.
Close square bracket,
and we're going to send
that entity description,
the method name, to return its name.
Close square bracket, close curly brace.
Finally,
I'm going to stick a colon S on the
end to tell it to display the summary
of the object that this returns,
which sends it the description method.
Let's go ahead and hit Return.
You can see now,
instead of displaying no real useful
information about our NSManage object,
it tells us that it's a
recipe NSManage object.
If we had a custom subclass,
we could call value for key,
print some information
about that managed object.
It can be very useful
when you're debugging.
You can also open up the console
and look at it that way as well.
Let's go back to our slides.
So finally, our last step,
we created a custom data formatter.
So let's see what happens when you put
Core Data together with Cocoa Bindings.
Chris is going to walk us through this.
Thanks, Rick.
Cocoa is great.
That's not a lot of work to
hook your data up to a table.
With Cocoa bindings,
you can do even more with even less work.
So what we're going to show you is
how to connect your prototype data
model up to a prototype interface,
the kind of interface that you
might get from a human interface
designer that you've hired,
or that you might have just
thrown together yourself while
trying to design your application.
Then we're going to show you how to
hook your single window application
into Core Data's provided undo handling.
Core Data actually provides full undo
support across your managed object graph.
That's part of why we
call them managed objects.
However, in a single window application,
you need to actually tell the window
to use Core Data's undo manager.
And finally,
we're going to iteratively add a
couple features to our application.
So let's go hands-on.
We're going to open-- excuse me.
We're going to open example four,
Core Recipes Cocoa Bindings Begin.
Excuse me here.
Let's just open up our nib file.
On our demo machine,
we'll probably have to do this by
navigating the Open File dialog
in Interface Builder.
We're most of the way there already.
Fortunately,
we put this stuff on our desktop.
And we can see that we already
have an interface set up.
However, it's not actually wired
up to our data model yet.
So what we're going to do is
take advantage of some of the
new features in Interface Builder
in Tiger and in our data model.
So let's switch to Xcode
and bring up our data model.
And let's drag that a little bit to
the right so that we'll be able to see
both our Interface Builder document
and our data model at the same time,
specifically the diagram view.
Now, you've all probably seen the demo
where you drag-- you option drag--
an entity from your data model into
an Interface Builder design window
and generate an interface for it.
But you can also drag directly
to an Interface Builder document
window and create a controller.
This is great if you don't actually
want to use the default interface,
but you do want a controller set up
already with all of the appropriate
keys for your managed object entity.
So the first thing we're going to do,
since our interface shows
recipes and ingredients,
is option drag our recipe entity
into our Interface Builder document.
Interface Builder will pop to the
front and ask us if we want to create
a controller for one or many objects.
Since we're going to be
controlling a table view,
We're going to tell it that we
want a controller for many objects.
This will create an NSArrayController.
You can see that we have
a recipe array controller,
and if you inspect it--
You can see that it's already configured
to control an entity instead of a class.
The entity's name is recipe.
And it's set to automatically
prepare its content.
That means that the first thing
it will do is it'll just fetch all
of the instances of that entity.
Now let's actually set up the table.
So double-click the Recipe table
at the left of the Design window.
That'll select the table view itself.
Now click on the Recipe column.
When we're working with bindings,
we generally don't bind
to the table itself,
although there are some
bindings on the table.
Most of the time, though,
we'll be binding values
on the table column.
So switch over to our Inspector and
bring up the Bindings pane.
and pull down the value.
Yeah,
might want to not zoom quite so much.
You can see that it's already set to
bind to our recipe array controller.
And we'll definitely want to
bind to the arranged objects
key of our array controller.
This is the sorted collection
of objects that were fetched.
And we'll want to use the model key path.
If you pop down the
model key path combo box,
we'll want to use a
model key path of name.
You can see all of the keys for the
recipe entity in that model key path
combo box because we dragged our
entity over from Interface Builder and
told Interface Builder all about it.
Next, let's set up our ingredients table.
Let's go back to our data model
again and scroll a little bit to
the right and do the same thing.
We can just option drag directly to
the Interface Builder document and
create a controller for many objects.
Inspecting our Ingredients
Array Controller,
we can see that, again,
its managed object context
is pre-bound for us.
We can also go to the
Attributes Inspector.
and see that it's configured to
be an entity array controller
for the entity named Ingredient.
Now, if we go back to our bindings,
We can see that only the
managed object context is set.
What this means is that this controller,
since it automatically prepares content,
will immediately try to
fetch all of our ingredients.
Since our interface is kind
of a master detail interface,
we don't necessarily want that.
Instead,
we want to be able to select a recipe
In the first column,
and then in the ingredients table,
see only the ingredients for that recipe.
So what we can do is we can bind
the content set binding of our
ingredient array controller.
So pop that down.
And we can use the
recipe array controller
Actually, no, we do want to use the
Ingredient Array Controller.
Sorry.
No, we want to use the
Recipe Array Controller.
Getting myself confused here.
We'll want to use the Selection
Controller key because this
represents the actual selected
objects in the Recipes table.
And we'll want to use a model
key path of ingredients.
This is a too many relationship key,
but it's still a key.
So let's close this up.
Close the content set.
I'm sorry.
And now we need to actually set
up the bindings on the individual
columns in the Ingredients table.
So just like the last table,
we can double-click the table view
and then click the ingredient column.
And pop down the value binding.
And bind to the Ingredient
Array Controller.
and use the controller key arranged
objects and the model key path of name.
Now, just highlight the amount column.
You can see that we're now
inspecting the amount column,
and our bindings inspector
has barely changed.
Obviously, this isn't bound yet,
so our bind checkbox isn't checked,
and our model keypath isn't filled in,
but our bind to pop-up is
still set to what it was the
last time we used this pane.
This is sort of a shortcut that makes it
very easy to successively set bindings
on various controls in your window.
So now we can just pull down the
model keypath and choose amount.
And we can do the same thing for
the Measure column and choose
the model key path of Measure.
Finally, we have a big text view at
the bottom of this window.
This is where the selected recipe
is going to show its ingredients.
So let's double click this.
And that will let us
inspect the text view.
You want to make sure that
you're inspecting the text view
and not the scroll view itself.
And you see that we have several
value bindings on the text view.
What we're going to bind
to is the data binding,
because this text view is actually
going to let us put in styled text.
So we're going to pop
down the data binding.
We're going to use the recipe
array controller with the
selection controller key.
And we're going to use a
model key path of directions.
If you were to look at this in the model,
you would see that the actual attribute
type of the directions attribute on
the Recipe entity is binary data.
But we're binding this to a text view,
so what we're going to need to
do is add a value transformer.
And just pop that down and
use NSUN Archive from Data.
And this way,
we can maintain the fidelity of the data
as we push it back and forth between
the model object and our bindings.
So we only need to do
a couple more things.
We need to set up our
add and remove buttons.
For this,
we're just going to use target action.
So highlight the Add button under our
recipes table and Control-drag from
it to the recipe array controller.
An Interface Builder will helpfully
switch to the target action subpane
of the Connections Inspector.
And let's just choose Add.
Connect that up.
And now,
Control-drag from the Remove button right
next to it to the REST PRA controller.
And you can see the Interface
Builder automatically
highlights the Remove method.
It tries to help you,
and it tries to derive what
to do from what you're doing.
So let's just connect that up.
and do the same thing under
the Ingredients table.
This time,
we're going to Control-drag from the
Add button to the Ingredient Array
Controller and choose its Add method.
and from the ingredient tables
remove button to the ingredient array
controller connecting to remove.
We now have our interface wired up.
Let's save this Interface
Builder document.
and go back to our application.
Now we can just build and go.
And we have no data at first,
so our application doesn't show anything.
But because we have Core Data managing
our object graph and we have
bindings managing our interface,
we can actually start
using our application.
So let's click the
Add button under Recipes,
and we can add a recipe.
Let's add another recipe too.
And let's just call the
first one Apple Pie.
and the second one, Chocolate Cake.
I'm in kind of a dessert
mood this morning.
So let's highlight Apple Pie and
add an ingredient to it.
And you can see that we added a new
managed object which can have a default
value for each of its attributes.
So the default value for
the name attribute of an
ingredient is new Ingredient,
and the default value for the
amount of an ingredient is 1.
So let's just add some apples here,
since that's the main
component of Apple Pie.
And Rick can pick the amount.
He's the chef.
And for our measures,
we can just say apple.
And of course, we need more than just
apples and apple pie.
We also need some pie crust.
Can buy that stuff ready-made, I guess.
And let's just,
let's use two because it's kind of
nice to have the strips layered on top.
And we're just going to use
Crust for the ingredients.
Now let's exercise our
Remove button here.
Let's highlight the
chocolate cake recipe,
since we're not going
to fill that in yet,
and click Remove.
And quit our application.
And we're just going to use
Crust for the ingredients.
Now let's exercise our
Remove button here.
Let's highlight the
chocolate cake recipe,
since we're not going
to fill that in yet,
and click Remove.
A lot of users, though-- well, actually,
I'll hold off on that.
Let's actually change the
pie crust to just say crust.
Now let's try to undo this.
So go up to the Edit menu,
and Undo isn't highlighted.
Well, this is because we made a
small change to the template
for purposes of illustration.
We can quit the application.
and go back to Xcode and open
up corerecipescontroller.m.
Now, if you're building a
document-based application,
the persistent document machinery handles
hooking up your Managed Object Context's
Undo Manager to your window.
And our application template
allows you to do that too,
but if you're building your own
application and you're creating
your windows on your own,
you'll need to know how to do this.
Basically, a window gets asked for
an undo controller to use.
So since we're using Core Data,
we want to provide that window with our
managed object context undo manager.
So we do that by making our
object the windows delegate,
which we've already done for
you in Interface Builder.
And then we fill in the
window delegate method.
Window will return undo manager.
So we just have a single line of code
commented out here for you that gets
the undo manager from our managed
object context and then returns
it as the Windows undo manager.
So if we build and run again,
We can see that our change was saved.
Now let's change that back to Pycrust.
and Undo.
We can see the Undo is highlighted,
so we can undo that change,
and we can even redo that change,
because now the Windows Undo Manager and
our Managed Object Context Undo Manager,
which is managing the object graph Undos,
are one and the same.
So we can even undo and redo
adding and removing objects.
So let's add a new ingredient,
and let's undo that.
Core Data provides you with
automatic undo and redo support.
So we save on quit,
but a lot of users like the
security of also being able
to save whenever they want.
After all,
sometimes you have power outages.
Sometimes your applications crash,
especially during development.
And if you look at the File menu,
we actually have an active Save menu.
However, it's not actually wired up.
It'll look like it's wired up,
but it's not actually
going to do anything.
So let's quit the application
and make that work.
Well, I've already done the work in our
sample of wiring it to the Save Action.
In our controller class,
but we haven't actually saved.
So let's uncomment that comment block.
And you can see that all we're
doing is asking our managed object
context to save our object graph.
And then if we get an error,
we use the new error presenting
machinery in our application to present
that error to the user in a nice form.
So let's actually exercise that.
Let's build and go, saving as we go.
Now let's add a new recipe.
And just as an aside,
Core Data also provides
validation machinery.
We have a validation rule on
recipe that says that you need at
least one ingredient in a recipe.
You can't save a recipe
without ingredients.
So let's try to save one using File Save.
We'll get an error from our application
using present error that says,
too few items in ingredients.
It's actually picking up that the
ingredients relationship on our recipe
So let's click OK.
Let's remove our new recipe.
And let's try to save again.
And this time we saved.
So what have we learned?
Let's go back to the slides.
Well, we created a prototype application
from a prototype human interface
and a prototype data model.
The human interface is something
that we might have gotten from
our human interface designer or
something we may have knocked up
in Interface Builder while we were
making our proposal for our project.
We integrated Core Data undo handling
in a single window application.
And this is exactly the kind of thing
that you'll need to do if you're building
an application with lots of windows,
where you're creating
the windows on the fly.
And we started iteratively adding
features to our prototype application,
fleshing it out.
We've used the power of bindings to make
it very easy to get our interface up
and running so we can use more time to
actually add features to our application.
Now, Rick's going to show us what happens
if you sit and do this for a while
with the Core Recipes application.
Thank you, Chris.
So if you want to open this
up and take a look at it,
it's in the Core Recipes
sample applications folder.
It's called Core Recipes App.
We've already built it here,
so we won't take the time to do that.
But on your own time,
I encourage you to take
a look through this.
It demonstrates a lot of advanced
techniques you can use in Core Data.
This is a recipe manager
written with Core Data,
Core Recipes.
This application works with both
the XML and the in-memory stores.
allows you to use multiple stores all
under one persistent store coordinator.
In fact,
when you add new stores to your machine,
it automatically finds
them with Spotlight.
and adds them under the Persistence
Store Coordinator so they show
up in your Persistence Stack.
It uses separate managed object
contexts for each editor window.
This allows each editor window to
have its own undo stack to allow
them to be saved separately without
having to save them all at once.
And those contexts are all sitting on top
of the same persistent store coordinator.
It allows you to create smart
groups using NS predicates and
fetch requests to fetch a subset
of the recipes in your library.
It generates URLs for managed
objects for recipes that you
can use to go back and look at a
particular recipe in the application.
It integrates with Spotlight, as I said.
And this is a bindings application.
So let's take a quick look at this.
Just going to open it up.
Like I said, we've already built it.
You see it's got an
iTunes-like interface.
We can add a new group.
And if we get info on that group,
we can build a predicate for it.
This is similar to the Predicate Builder,
but what it's really just
doing is programmatically
building an NS predicate.
which we'll then use to set
on our fetch request to fetch
a certain set of recipes.
We can go to our library
and look at a recipe.
You open it up.
Let's close this and take a look
at building a URL for a recipe.
Close this recipe and we've got a
little button in the upper right
that'll save it as an RTF document.
Export it.
If you look in that RTF document,
it's formatted nicely.
Down at the bottom,
there's a URL to go back to
our recipe in Core Recipes app.
And if we click on that,
it opens it right up.
We don't have time today to show you
all the features of Core Recipes app,
but like I said,
I encourage you to take a look at it,
read through the code,
read the README file,
play around with it,
see the sort of things you can do.
So let's jump back to our slides.
And Chris is going to go over a
few advanced topics quickly for us.
So really right now,
what we've done is give you
sort of a taste of what it's
like to develop with Core Data.
But as you go on and
develop your applications,
there's some advanced topics that you
might run into that we haven't covered.
For example, if you actually look at all
these calls that we make to
add persistent store with type,
which adds a persistent store at a
URL to a persistent store coordinator,
you'll see that there's a
configuration parameter.
But what does that actually mean?
Well, a configuration is just a named
collection of entities that
you set up in your data model.
And what this lets you do is constrain
your storage for a particular store to
a subset of the entities in your model.
For example,
you can store some entities in one store,
and you can store some other
entities in a different store,
but use the same model.
Now,
you can't create relationships between
entities in different persistent stores,
but you can record, for example,
object IDs by using
the URI representation.
Oops.
We also have this concept
of transient properties.
As you're editing your model,
you'll see a transient
checkbox on your attributes.
that might be a little, you know,
mysterious.
I mean, we talk about Core data as
an object graph management
and persistence framework.
Well, transient attributes get you
all the management of Core data,
but without the persistence.
So these are really useful for
computed values that you need to model.
For example, we added the Chef -- the
full name key under Chef.
We could have added that as
a transient attribute and
implemented it in the same way.
However,
what we would have then been able
to do is actually option drag our
Chef entity into an interface builder
design window and generate an interface
that included that full name attribute.
This also lets you use
your own value classes.
For example, you can create an attribute
with an undefined attribute
type that is backed by,
for example,
another attribute in your entity.
And you can give your first attribute,
say, an NSColor.
Now that NSColor can't be stored by
Core Data because Core Data doesn't
know how to store those,
but you can turn it into a data
object that you store in a separate
attribute and that you populate
your transient with on fetch.
And finally,
this is a big topic that's been coming up
recently on the Cocoa Dev mailing list,
copy and paste and drag and
drop of managed objects.
This is something that you'll
need to think about a little bit.
It's not supported automatically,
but you can, if you're just doing things
within your own application,
pass around object IDs.
Now, you're going to need to think
a little bit about this,
though, because you won't want to pass
object IDs to newly inserted
objects between contexts.
Because the contexts sit on top of
the persistent store coordinator,
but until an object is saved,
it sort of lives in that context alone.
So a better strategy might be to
encode just the data that you need
from that object on the pasteboard.
Of course, once you start encoding
data from your object,
you need to consider what
this means for relationships.
After all,
you don't want to actually encode your
entire object graph onto the pasteboard
when you're just copying a single object.
So you need to consider whether a
relationship represents containment.
For example,
a recipe has a bunch of ingredients,
and those ingredients are tightly bound.
They're contained within that recipe.
Or whether it just
represents association.
For example, a recipe also has a chef,
but it doesn't own that chef.
That chef actually owns the recipes.
So copying a recipe
shouldn't copy the chef,
but it should copy its ingredients.
So these are just some of the things
that you might want to consider.
And then you might want to start
thinking about as you start building
applications with core data.
and for more on this topic,
you can attend Advanced Core Data Usages,
Session 143 tomorrow at 2:00 PM.
Now Rick's going to tell
us where to go from here.
Thank you for coming today.
If you're looking for more information,
such as our documentation,
sample code and other resources,
please go to the WWDC 2005 website.
Also on your Tiger DVD when you install
Xcode it will install developer examples,
if you look in
Developer Examples Core Data you'll
see some examples there.
We've got some excellent
Core Data documentation written by
Malcolm Crawford online and in the
documentation installed with Xcode.
We've got a bunch of
Core Data sessions left today.
We have two Core Data labs,
one at 12:00 and one at 3:30.
I encourage you to come
there with your code,
with your questions,
and we'll sit down with you and
help you make the most of Core Data.
There's a session on getting the most
out of Cocoa Bindings today at 2:00.
Cocoa Bindings doesn't need
to be used with Core Data,
but they go hand in hand very well,
and I recommend you attend that one if
you want to build Cocoa applications
that work well and build them quickly.
Tomorrow at 9:00 we
have our feedback forum.
Come and give us your questions,
your comments, your concerns,
and your raves.
And tomorrow at 2:00 p.m.
is the advanced Core Data usage session.
We'll go over a lot more of the
advanced tips and tricks you'll
need to use when you're building a
real complex real-world application.
We'd love your feedback on
how this session was for you,
so please talk to Xavier Allegros
or Matthew Formica.
You can find their email addresses
here or probably on the WWDC website,
and let them know what we
could do better next time,
how it worked for you.
Thank you for coming,
and have a great rest of your day.
of WWDC.